= MagLev Sinatra Examples

The files in this directory are some examples of using Sinatra with MagLev.
You must first install the Sinatra and Rack gems:

  $ $MAGLEV_HOME/bin/bundle install

== Simple Example

=== Hello

<tt>sinatra_hello.rb</tt> is a Sinatra app that runs several of the example
features from the {Sinatra Book}[http://sinatra-book.gittr.com/].  To run
it:

  $ rake hello

Then hit http://localhost:4567/

=== Sinatra Test

<tt>sinatra_app.rb</tt> and <tt>sinatra_app_test.rb</tt> are simple hello
world app and an associated MiniTest for it that shows how
<tt>rack/test</tt> works with MagLev.
To run the tests:

  $ rake test

To run the app:

  $ rake app

== Other Examples

The sub-directories contain more involved sample applications:

- <tt>maglev_sessions</tt> contains an example of using MagLev to store
  HTTP session data.
- <tt>simple_blog</tt> contains a simple blog using MagLev persistence for
  the posts.
- <tt>object_inspector</tt> implements a web front end to the MagLev
  ObjectLog (used for debugging, and by the simple blog app).

== Issues with Sinatra under MagLev

=== How it is supposed to work

One of the standard ways to run a Sinatra app is to write it in one file:

  # my_sinatra_app.rb

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'sinatra'

  get '/' do
    "Sinatra #{Sinatra::VERSION} says Hello"
  end

and then run it:

  $ maglev-ruby my_sinatra_app.rb

The <tt>require 'sinatra'</tt> reads the Sinatra code, which has the side
effect of setting up an <tt>at_exit</tt> handler that will invoke your
application.  Ruby then continues to read the file, and finally falls off
the bottom.  At that point, the previously installed <tt>at_exit</tt>
handler is invoked, which starts the application running.

=== Issue 1: Sinatra can't figure out the right file

Sinatra examines the calling stack to try and figure out the name of the
file that was invoked (from the <tt>at_exit</tt> handler, so
<tt>\_\_FILE\_\_</tt> is not available).  Currently, the MagLev format from
<tt>Kernel#caller</tt> confuses Sinatra and it can't figure out which file
is the main file, and so the app does not start.

There are two workarounds for this.  The first is to put <tt>set :run,
true</tt> in your app (see <tt>sinatra_app.rb</tt> for an example).  The
second method, is to use +rackup+, or some other means to start the
application.  The Sinatra application in <tt>simple_blog</tt> is an example
of this approach.

