= MagLev Indexing Example

This directory contains an example of using MagLev's built-in indexing
support to provide efficient search of unordered collections.  There are
two demos and some tests.

== Simple Demo

<tt>index_example.rb</tt> is a single file overview of indexing with
comments.  The commented code in <tt>index_example.rb</tt> is the best
place to get an introduction to indexing.

The demo creates an indexed collection of people objects, inserts 100,000
random people into it and performs a number of queries over the collection
(e.g., "find all the people less than 25 years old", or "find all the
people who are both old and a hermit").

To run the demo:
  $ rake demo

== Persistent Demo

<tt>create_random_people.rb</tt> and <tt>search_random_people.rb</tt>
comprise a second example using MagLev persistence with the indexes.

<tt>create_random_people.rb</tt> creates a collection of random people,
indexes the collection on the 'age' field, and then commits it to the
repository.  By default, the script creates 100,000 users.  By passing a
parameter, you can control how big the collection is.

<tt>search_random_people.rb</tt> runs indexed and non-indexed queries
against the persisted data.

To run:

  $ rake commit    # Or "rake commit:data_1m" to create 1 million people
  $ rake search    # runs search_random_people against the committed dataset

== Fixed vs Dynamic Instance Variables


By default, all instance variables in MagLev are dynamic. The indexing
subsystem has not yet been updated to work with dynamic instance
variables.  In order to index a collection on a particular instance
variable, it must be a fixed instance variable.  You can declare them like
this:

  class Address
    self.__fixed_instvars :@age, :@height

    attr_accessor :age, :height

    ... # rest of class
  end

If you get an error message like the followin, you need to define the
instance variables as fixed.
  #<RuntimeError: The object aPerson does not have an instance variable with the given name #'@age'>

For more information on fixed vs dynamic instance variables, see:
* {release notes}[link:docs/release_notes_rdoc.html]
* https://magtrac.gemstone.com/ticket/844



