fails:Array#pack with format 'A' taints the output string if the format string is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' raises ArgumentError when the format modifier is '_'
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' raises ArgumentError when the format modifier is '!'
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a tainted string when a pack argument is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' taints the output string if the format string is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' raises ArgumentError when the format modifier is '_'
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' raises ArgumentError when the format modifier is '!'
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a tainted string when a pack argument is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a tainted string when the format is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a tainted string when an empty format is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a untrusted string when the format is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a untrusted string when the empty format is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a untrusted string when a pack argument is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a trusted string when the array is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'A' returns a string in encoding of common to the concatenated results
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a tainted string when the format is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a tainted string when an empty format is tainted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a untrusted string when the format is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a untrusted string when the empty format is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a untrusted string when a pack argument is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a trusted string when the array is untrusted
fails:Array#pack with format 'a' returns a string in encoding of common to the concatenated results
