= How to Build MagLev

These are notes on how to build the MagLev image from scratch.

== Quick Start

The build assumes the following file-system layout:

  $MAGLEV_HOME            # checkout from github
  $MAGLEV_HOME/gemstone   # the VM (from install.sh / upgrade.sh)

The only environment variable you should set is MAGLEV_HOME (GEMSTONE
etc. will be calculated from $MAGLEV_HOME)

=== Step 1: Checkout github

Checkout this github repository:

  $ git clone git://github.com/MagLev/maglev.git
  $ export MAGLEV_HOME=$PWD/maglev

=== Step 2: Install VM

  $ cd $MAGLEV_HOME
  $ ./install.sh xxxxx

=== Step 3: Build MagLev image

  $ rake build:maglev

== How it all fits together

MagLev is layered on top of the GemStone/S Smalltalk Virtual Machine.  To
build MagLev, we start with s pure Smalltalk system, and then add layers of
Ruby features on top of it.  To do this, we use the Smalltalk tools and
methods to introduce the core ruby extensions needed, and then run the pure
Ruby definitions after that.

=== VM versus image

The Smalltalk VM is just a C++ program that runs and manages an object
memory.  The VM has an Object Manager that knows how to create and delete
objects in memory.

The objects live in a large chunk of memory known as "object memory".  When
the VM starts up, it allocates space for object memory, and then starts
loading objects from the stone and putting them into the object memory and
activating them.  The base persistent objects (Object, Class, Array, Hash,
etc.) all live in the Stone, and the Object Manager brings them into life
at VM startup.  To add the base ruby objects and classes, we start a stone
to serve the base smalltalk image (extent0.dbf), and then run a VM that
reads files from src/smalltalk/ruby into the system, and then commits
(saves) those new objects to the image.  We rename the image to
extent0.ruby.dbf, and use this new image as the base for all Ruby stones.

TODO: Describe mcz directory

The scripts that load the ruby objects into the image are a combination of
rakefiles (rakelib/build.rake) and topaz scripts.  Topaz is a C program
that runs a GemStone VM, and provides a command line interface to that VM;
see
http://community.gemstone.com/download/attachments/6816350/GS64-Topaz-3.0.pdf?version=1
.

== Misc

The following notes are just reminders for VMware MagLev engineers on how
we moved source out of the internal SVN branch and over to github.

The SVN branch is
 https://svn.gemstone.com/repos/smalltalk/server/64bit/branches/gss64_maglev_branch

From that branch, we did:
1. mv gss64_maglev_branch/image/smalltalk/ruby $MAGLEV_HOME/src/smalltalk
2. removed the .mcz
3. Added $MAGLEV_HOME/src/smalltalk/mcz with the contents of the mcz
4. Added some MagLev specific methods to Monticello to manage writing the
   .mcz contents to files in src/smalltalk/ruby/mcz

