= Topaz: The MagLev Low Level Debugger

== Debugging scripts with MagLev

Topaz is currently the primary debugging tool for use with MagLev.  Most
of this document describes debugging with Topaz.

An alternate approach is to use GemTools, written in Squeak, for debugging.
See {debug from smalltalk}[link:files/docs/debug_from_smalltalk.html]

=== Use <tt>-d</tt> to run MagLev in debug mode

Run maglev with the <tt>-d</tt> option to run in debug mode.  Uncaught
exceptions will land you in the Topaz prompt, where you can examine the
stack etc.  Here is a sample file:

    $ cat debug_example.rb
    def raise_exception
      raise "Sample exception"
    end

    def another_method
      raise_exception
    end

    another_method

To debug, invoke MagLev with the <tt>-d</tt> option:

    $ maglev-ruby -d debug_example.rb
     _____________________________________________________________________________
    |                             Configuration Files                             |
    |                                                                             |
    | System File: /Users/pmclain/projects/maglev/git/etc/system.conf             |
    |                                                                             |
    | Executable File: /Users/pmclain/tmp/gem.conf                                |
    | Warning:  File not found (errno=2,ENOENT, The file or directory specified cannot
    | be found)                                                                   |
    |           using defaults.                                                   |
    |_____________________________________________________________________________|
    (vmGc spaceSizes: eden init 2000K max 28128K , survivor init 336K max 4688K,
     vmGc    old max 112496K, code max 30000K, perm max 15000K, pom 10 * 12504K = 125040K,
     vmGc    remSet 2880K, meSpace max 143384K oopMapSize 1048576 )
     _____________________________________________________________________________
    |             GemStone/S64 Object-Oriented Data Management System             |
    |               Copyright (C) GemStone Systems, Inc. 1986-2008.               |
    |                            All rights reserved.                             |
    |     covered by Patent Number 6,567,905 Generational Garbage Collector.      |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |    PROGRAM: topaz, Linear GemStone Interface (Linked Session)               |
    |    VERSION: 3.0.0, Tue Dec  2 17:07:56 2008 pmclain private build           |
    |      BUILD: 64bit-20633-PRIVATE                                             |
    |  BUILT FOR: Darwin (Mac)                                                    |
    |       MODE: 64 bit                                                          |
    | RUNNING ON: 2-CPU cairo.gemstone.com i386 (Darwin 9.5.0 ) 2400MHz MacBook4,1|
    | 2048MB                                                                      |
    | PROCESS ID: 16567     DATE: 12/04/08 18:01:15 PST                           |
    |   USER IDS: REAL=pmclain (650) EFFECTIVE=pmclain (650)                      |
    |_____________________________________________________________________________|
    [Info]: LNK client/gem GCI levels = 801/801
    -----------------------------------------------------
    GemStone: Error         Nonfatal
    Error, 'Sample exception'
    Error Category: 231169 [GemStone] Number: 2023 Arg Count: 1 Context : 91077889
    Arg 1: [91078913 sz:16 cls: 74753 String] Sample exception
    topaz 1>

We are now at the Topaz prompt and can look at the stack with the +where+
command (abbreviated +wh+):

    topaz 1> wh
    ==> 1 Exception >> _pass:with: (envId 0) @8 line 23   [methId 2266369]
    2 Exception >> pass (envId 0) @2 line 14   [methId 4062465]
    3 [] in  RubyFile >> load (envId 0) @4 line 18   [methId 53753089]
    4 Exception >> _executeHandler: (envId 0) @2 line 7   [methId 2186753]
    5 Exception >> _pass:with: (envId 0) @4 line 18   [methId 2266369]
    6 Exception >> pass (envId 0) @2 line 14   [methId 4062465]
    7 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @4 line 26   [methId 52167937]
    8 Exception >> _executeHandler: (envId 0) @2 line 7   [methId 2186753]
    9 Exception >> signal (envId 0) @1 line 1   [methId 2180865]
    10 Exception >> signal: (envId 0) @3 line 7   [methId 2161921]
    11 Exception class >> signal: (envId 0) @3 line 4   [methId 2045953]
    12 Object >> raise:: (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 72786689]
    13 String >> signal (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 72575745]
    14 String >> signal: (envId 1) @2 line 1   [methId 72632321]
    15 Object >> raise: (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 72742913]
    16 Object >> raise_exception (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 91096065]
    17 Object >> another_method (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 91097089]
    18 Object >> _compileFile (envId 1) @6 line 9   [methId 91098113]
    19 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @3 line 10   [methId 52139009]
    20 [] in  RubyCompiler >> loadFileNamed: (envId 0) @2 line 2   [methId 51476481]
    21 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @3 line 10   [methId 52141569]
    ...
    topaz 1>

To see the location in the ruby source file, we'll look at stack frame 18,
using the +frame+ command (abbreviated +fr+):

    topaz 1> fr 18
    18 Object >> _compileFile (envId 1) @6 line 9   [methId 91098113]
        receiver [91094785 sz:0 cls: 72193 Object] anObject
    topaz 1>

And then +list+ the current frame's source:

    topaz 1> list
       def raise_exception
         raise "Sample exception"
       end

       def another_method
         raise_exception
       end

       another_method
     * ^6                                                                 *******

       # method starts at line 1 of file /Users/pmclain/tmp/debug_example.rb
    topaz 1>

We can move down the stack with the +down+ command:

    topaz 1> down
    17 Object >> another_method (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 91097089]
        receiver [91094785 sz:0 cls: 72193 Object] anObject
    topaz 1>

And we can focus in on the current section of the stack frame by using
+where+ with a parameter:

    topaz 1> wh 10
    17 Object >> another_method (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 91097089]
    18 Object >> _compileFile (envId 1) @6 line 9   [methId 91098113]
    19 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @3 line 10   [methId 52139009]
    20 [] in  RubyCompiler >> loadFileNamed: (envId 0) @2 line 2   [methId 51476481]
    21 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @3 line 10   [methId 52141569]
    22 ExecBlock >> on:do: (envId 0) @2 line 53   [methId 4329729]
    23 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @6 line 11   [methId 52148225]
    24 ExecBlock >> ensure: (envId 0) @2 line 10   [methId 4310273]
    25 [] in  RubyCompiler >> compileFileNamed:do: (envId 0) @12 line 19   [methId 52168193]
    26 ExecBlock >> on:do: (envId 0) @2 line 53   [methId 4329729]
    topaz 1> list
       def another_method
         raise_exception
     * ^2                                                                 *******

       # method starts at line 5 of file /Users/pmclain/tmp/debug_example.rb
    topaz 1> down
    16 Object >> raise_exception (envId 1) @2 line 2   [methId 91096065]
        receiver [91094785 sz:0 cls: 72193 Object] anObject
    topaz 1> list
       def raise_exception
         raise "Sample exception"
     * ^2                                                                 *******

       # method starts at line 1 of file /Users/pmclain/tmp/debug_example.rb
    topaz 1>

Etc.  Read the Topaz manual for all the details.

=== Debug by installing an exception handler

Often, it is convenient to debug when catching a specific exception.  You
can install a debug handler in your ruby code
(<tt>Exception.install_debug_block</tt>) that will be called for all ruby
exceptions.  You can then choose to drop down into topaz:

  # Run this file with "maglev-ruby -d" to see how the debug block interacts
  # with the topaz debugger.

  # This debug block will catch all ruby exceptions raised by the program.
  # This example prints all the exceptions, and drops into topaz for
  # RuntimeErrors
  Exception.install_debug_block do |e|
    puts "-- Caught #{e}"      # Print all exceptions

    case e
    when RuntimeError
      # drop into topaz if we get a RuntimeError
      nil.pause
    end

    # Since we did not re-raise the exception, the program will continue.
  end

  def raise_a_ruckus(exception)
    begin
      puts "-- About to raise #{exception}"
      raise exception
    rescue Exception
      # Rescue, just so we don't terminate
    end
  end

  # Raise some random exceptions, to see how
  [IOError.new, RuntimeError.new, NotImplementedError.new].each do |e|
    raise_a_ruckus(e)
  end


If you run the script above, with <tt>maglev-ruby -d</tt>, then you'll see
each of the exceptions printed on stdout, and then you'll be dropped into
the topaz debugger when the <tt>RuntimeError</tt> is raised.  You can
examine the stack, and then <tt>continue</tt>, and the rest of the program
will complete.

==== Pausing with <tt>nil.pause</tt>

If you run in debug mode, you can pause and get the Topaz prompt using
<tt>nil.pause</tt> (or <tt>anything_else.pause</tt>) in your ruby code:

    nil.pause if rand(10) == 7 # if you're lucky, pause 10% of the time

Then you can continue with +continue+:

==== Debugging src/kernel code

Sometimes it is helpful to add debugging code in the src/kernel/* code.
Since this is bootstrap code, you may want to turn off debugging code until
after the bootstrap phase (since not all objects/methods are available).
You can use the <tt>$MaglevInBootstrap</tt> global variable to test the
bootstrap state.

E.g., here we instrument Module#include to print out module inclusion:

     # src/kernel/Module.rb
     # ...
     def include(*modules)
       # this variant gets bridge methods
       unless $MaglevInBootstrap
         # puts not available during bootstrap
         puts "======= (Module) #{self}.include(#{modules.inspect})"
       end
       modules.reverse.each do |a_module|
         a_module.append_features(self)
         a_module.included(self)
       end
       self
     end
     def include(a_module)
       # variant needed for bootstrap
       unless $MaglevInBootstrap
         # puts not available during bootstrap
         puts "======= (Module) #{self}.include(#{a_module})"
       end
       a_module.append_features(self)
       a_module.included(self)
       self
     end

We then reload primitives (to enable our debug code; rake
maglev:reload_prims).  When we run a program:
    ...
    ======= (Module) Gem::Version.include(Comparable)
    ======= (Module) Gem::Requirement.include(Comparable)
    ======= (Module) FileUtils.include(FileUtils::StreamUtils_)
    ======= (Module) FileUtils::Entry_.include(FileUtils::StreamUtils_)
    ======= (Module) FileUtils::Verbose.include(FileUtils)
    ======= (Module) FileUtils::NoWrite.include(FileUtils)
    ======= (Module) FileUtils::DryRun.include(FileUtils)
    ...

== Topaz Overview, Documentation and Help

Most of the scripts and rake tasks are based on Topaz scripts and use the
initialization files in <tt>$MAGLEV_HOME/etc/*</tt> to log into Topaz and
setup the MagLev Ruby environment.

=== Topaz Manual

{The Topaz Programming Environment}[http://seaside.gemstone.com/docs/GS64-Topaz-2.3.pdf]
manual contains documentation on using Topaz with GemStone/S. However, that
version of the manual is for the 2.3 version of GemStone/S, and MagLev runs
on the 3.0 version of GemStone/S.  GemStone/S 3.0 has not yet been publicly
released.  When 3.0 documentation becomes available, GemStone will update
the link.

=== Topaz Help
Topaz version 3.0 has online help, which includes the Ruby-specific commands
that are not covered in the manual:

  topaz 1> help

    TOPAZ - a programmer's interface to the GemStone system

    For an overview of Topaz, see the "Overview" help topic.

  Help is available for:
  HELP       ABORT      BEGIN      BREAK      C          CATEGORY:
  CLASSMETHOD:          COMMIT     CONTINUE   DEFINE     DISPLAY
  DISASSEM   DOIT       DOWN [<anInteger>]    EDIT       ERRORCOUNT
  EXIT [<status>]       EXITIFNOERROR         EXPECTBUG
  EXPECTERROR           EXPECTVALUE           FILEOUT
  FRAME [<anInteger>]   GCITRACE   HIERARCHY  IFERR      IFERR_LIST
  IFERR_CLEAR           IFERROR    INPUT      LEVEL      LIMIT
  LIST       LISTW      LOADUA     LOGIN      LOGOUT     LOOKUP
  METHOD:    OBJECT     OBJ1       OBJ2       OBJ1Z      OBJ2Z
  Object_Specification_Formats     OMIT       OPAL       OUTPUT
  PAUSEFORDEBUG         PRINTIT    PROTECTMETHODS
  UNPROTECTMETHODS      RELEASEALL            REMARK
  REMOVEALLMETHODS      REMOVEALLCLASSMETHODS RUBYHIERARCHY
  RUBYLIST   RUBYLOOKUP RUBYMETHOD RUBYCLASSMETHOD       RUBYRUN
  RUN        RUNENV     INTERP     INTERPENV  NBRUN      NBSTEP
  NBRESULT   SEND       SENDENV    SET        SHELL      SPAWN
  STACK      STACKWAITFORDEBUG     STK        STATUS     STEP
  TEMPORARY  THREAD     THREADS    TIME       TOPAZPAUSEFORDEBUG
  TOPAZWAITFORDEBUG     QUIT [<status>]       UP [<anInteger>]
  WHERE <various options>          Overview   Blanks
  Break_Handling_in_Topaz          Debugging_Smalltalk_DB_Code
  Initialization        Local_Variables       Multiple_Sessions
  Specifying_Objects    Strings    Linked_vs_RPC
  Network_Resource_String
  Topic?

press RETURN to continue...

=== Summary of Topaz commands

==== Exit and Help

+exit+::  Exit Topaz
+help+::  Get help

==== Stack info
+where+::
  List current stack
<tt>where nn</tt>:: Show only +nn+ frames starting at current frame.
<tt>where string</tt>:: Show only frames containing +string+. +string+ cannot start with +, -, a decimal digit, or contain whitespace. Search is case-sensitive. Current frame is set to first frame matched by the search.
<tt>where 'string'</tt>:: Same as above, but <tt>'string'</tt> may contain digits and whitespace.
+frame+::
  Show information about the current frame
+list+::
  List source code for the current frame
+listw+::
  List a window of source code around the current IP location. Useful if
  you have a long method, and just want to concentrate on the current
  location.
+down+:: Move down one stack frame.
+up+::   Move up one stack frame.

=== Example usage of WHERE for debuggging a RubySpec failure
<tt>fr 5</tt>::   See reason for failure where the "pause" for DEBUG_SPEC is
<tt>wh _co</tt>:: Search for _compileFile frames
<tt>l</tt>::      Window listing for first _compileFile frame

==== Break point control
<tt>break method Foo bar @ 2</tt>::
  Break at step point 2 in Foo#bar.

+continue+:: Continue after a break point.

<tt>set class Foo</tt>:: Set the current class to +Foo+
<tt>list step method: bar</tt>::
  List source code with possible break points shown.  Use this to figure
  out which numeric parameter to pass via <tt>@ nn</tt> for the break
  method above.
<tt>list breaks</tt>:: List current break points
<tt>list breaks method: foo</tt>:: List

==== Examining variables at different levels of detail
<tt>display oops</tt>::
  Turn on display of object ids (necessary for examining variables)
<tt>obj1 @ NNN</tt>::
  Inspect the object with id +NNN+, one level deep
<tt>obj2 @ NNN</tt>::
  Inspect the object with id +NNN+, two levels deep
<tt>level N</tt>::
  Set the default display level to +N+.

== Running Topaz directly
You can get a Topaz prompt via rake (but you will not yet be logged into
the VM).

  $ cd $MAGLEV_HOME
  $ rake dev:topaz
  (in /Users/pmclain/maglev)
  topaz 1>

Type +exit+ to leave Topaz


