= Release Notes for the MagLev Alpha
== <tt>$MAGLEV_HOME/lib</tt>
=== iconv:  'Unable to find FFI 'iconv_open' in: ,

On Mac OSX, a require of iconv may result in the following error message:

  ERROR 2023, Error, 'Unable to find FFI 'iconv_open' in: ,

This has been seen on machines with the MacPorts version of libiconv.dylib
installed AND the <tt>DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH</tt> environment variable
set to load the MacPorts version.  This is because the names of the
routines in the MacPorts version of iconv are different than the names in
the Apple supplied iconv.

Here are the names in the Apple provided iconv:

  $ nm /usr/lib/libiconv.dylib | grep iconv_open
  000150b5 T _iconv_open
  000158cc T _libiconv_open

Here are the names in the MacPorts version:

    $ nm /opt/local/lib/libiconv.dylib | grep iconv_open
    0000000000017f30 T _libiconv_open
    0000000000018a60 T _libiconv_open_into

Solution is to ensure the DYLD_FALLBACK_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable
is not set when running MagLev.

== Persistence support

See the {Persistence API}[link:files/docs/persistence-api.html]

== Special methods
* Underscore + camelCase = GemStone unmodifiable code.  There are several
  methods that begin with an underscore and are camelCase,
  e.g. <tt>_isArray</tt>.  MagLev will not allow you to re-define these
  methods.

* The method names (selectors) <tt>eval</tt>, <tt>class_eval</tt>,
  <tt>module_eval</tt> and <tt>instance_eval</tt> are handled specially in
  maglev.  If you define a method with one of those selectors, then you'll
  get an error when trying to call it.  E.g., given:

    class C
      def eval(an_arg)
        ...
      end
    end

    C.new.eval("puts 10")

  When you run it, you'll get:

    error , too many arguments,
              during foo.rb
    ERROR 2023, Error, 'too many arguments' (ArgumentError)

== Dynamic vs Fixed Instance Variables

The MagLev VM supports both fixed and dynamic instance variables.  For
Ruby, the default type of instance variable is dynamic, for Smalltalk, the
default is fixed.

The VM optimizes access to fixed instance variables by making references to
them a simple integer offset from a well known location in the object
structure.  These optimized instance variables are known as "fixed" or
"static" instance variables.  The other type of instance variable is a
dynamic instance variable.  The VM must lookup references to dynamic
instance variables at runtime, by searching for them by name. This takes
more time than using a pre-computed index.

=== How to declare fixed instance variables

MagLev provides the '__fixed_instvars' directive to declare fixed inst vars
(it is a "directive", not a method, since it is recognized by the parser
and handled at parse time, not an expression evaluated at runtime).

  class C
    self.__fixed_instvars('@foo', :@bar)

    # rest of class....
  end

There are some restrictions on the use of the __fixed_instvars directive.
+ May only be issued once per class.
+ May only be issued in the first opening of the class.
+ The parameters must be simple strings or symbols (i.e., cannot be
  expressions that are evaluated, nor can they be string interpolations
  like "@#{something_or_other}".
+ Must be in the main class body (not in a method definition nor in a
  singleton construct).

=== Implications for Persistence

==== Why MagLev has all dynamic instance variables by default

Smalltalk classes contain a list of instance variables.  All Smalltalk
objects allocate space for all instance variables, and instance variables
are accessed as fixed offsets from the object header.  Whan an instance
variable is added or removed from a Smalltalk class, or the order of
instance variables is changed, the Smalltalk system creates a new version
of that class, recompiles all methods to use the new offsets.  All
instances of the old class need to be migrated to the new class, at which
time, the instance variables are then in-sync with the method definitions.

Ruby is not Smalltalk. In Smalltalk, the developer explicitly manages the
list of fixed inst vars, and there is a clear trigger that indicates all
methods need re-compiling and that old instances should be migrated to the
new format. This is not the case in Ruby.  Imagine a customer application
that has this persisted class, and imagine that instance variables were
fixed:

    class C
      def foo
        @foo = 1
      end

      def bar
        @bar = 2
      end
      ...
    end

The class and instances are persisted. Then they release version 2 of the
app, and for some reason, they simply swap the order of the method defns:
    class C
      def bar
        @bar = 2
      end

      def foo
        @foo = 1
      end
      ...
    end

If they persist this, and the methods get re-compiled, or they add new
methods, then we will have a mix of instances and/or methods that have
different opinions on the ordering of the inst vars. We could work around
that issue by sorting the fixed inst vars by name, but that only solves
some of the scenarios, e.g., it doesn't fix addition of new variables or
removal of old ones.

==== Use of Fixed Instance Variables

MagLev now supports the __fixed_instvars directive.  This allows the Ruby
developer to declare, and take responsibility for, fixed instance
variables.  If objects with fixed instance variables are persisted in the
repository, and the developer decides to add, remove or re-order the fixed
instance variables, they must also take responsibility for migrating old
instances to the new schema.

=== <tt>--stone s</tt>

By default, <tt>maglev-ruby</tt> starts a VM that will attempt to connect
to the stone (repository server) named 'maglev'.  The <tt>--stone
astone</tt> option tells the VM to connect to the stone named 'astone'.

New stones can be created and managed via the +Rakefile+ in
<tt>$MAGLEV_HOME</tt>:

  $ rake -T stone
  (in /Users/pmclain/GemStone/checkouts/git)
  rake stone:all[task_name]        # Invoke a task on all MagLev servers
  rake stone:create[server_name]   # Create a new MagLev server and repository
  rake stone:destroy[server_name]  # Destroy an existing MagLev server and repository
  rake stone:list                  # List MagLev servers managed by this Rakefile

=== <tt>-Mcommit</tt>

This flag is intended as an easy way to commit code (and data) in a ruby
file to the persistent store. The flag does two things (1) wraps the entire
file in a persistent block, and (2) commits upon exiting.

E.g., this command:

  $ maglev-ruby -Mcommit foo.rb

acts like this:

    Maglev.persistent do
      require 'foo.rb'
    end
    Maglev.commit_transaction

=== <tt>-Mpersistent</tt>

Starts the VM in persistent mode (normally it is started in transient
mode).  E.g., this command:

  $ maglev-ruby -Mpersistent foo.rb

acts like this:

    Maglev.persistent do
      require 'foo.rb'
    end

=== <tt>-MtraceGlobals</tt>

This is a debug flag that prints trace information when global variables
are defined or have their values set.

=== <tt>-MtraceLoad</tt>

This is a debug flag that prints trace information as each <tt>.rb</tt>
file is read by MagLev (from either a require or a load).

=== <tt>-MlogSexp</tt>

This is a debug flag that prints s-expressions as they are parsed by the parser.
This can be pretty verbose...

=== <tt>-Mrlwrap</tt>

Runs MagLev with rlwrap.  This provides command line editing support if you
end up in the topaz debugger, or for irb.

== RubyGems

MagLev comes with a copy of RubyGems pre-installed.  Gems get loaded
into <tt>$MAGLEV_HOME/lib/maglev/gems/1.8/gems</tt>.  Gems that are based
on a C-extension may not install or run with MagLev.

== Kernel
* Note that we don't support instance variables as block arguments,
  <tt>{ |@cc| }</tt> must be coded as <tt>{ | c | @cc = c }</tt>.
* <tt>Kernel#require</tt>: Tilde expansion is done only on <tt>~/...</tt>,
  not on <tt>~user/...</tt>, <tt>$"</tt> is not updated

=== Noise from rlwrap
* In some cases, <tt>rlwrap</tt> (see
  Prerequisites[link:files/docs/prerequisites.html]) will output noise
  while typing at a Topaz prompt (Linux only).

== Unsupported Features
* +ARGF+ is not supported.
* Continuations are not supported.
* Most methods in +ObjectSpace+ are stubs that raise
  +NotImplementedError+.
* <tt>String#unpack</tt> and <tt>Array#pack</tt> do not support pointers ('p' and 'P').
* <tt>Kernel#set_trace_func</tt> is not supported.
