
= Notes on setting up a Multi-Machine MagLev environment

== Overview

Even though most MagLev development is done with a single MagLev VM talking
to a MagLev repository on the same machine, MagLev is a distributed system
and allows MagLev VMs from multiple machines to connect to the same
repository.  This note describes how to configure that scenario.

== Synopsis

=== Setup the Repository machine and start MagLev

1. Ensure <tt>netldi</tt> is properly configured

   On both the stone machine and the client VM machines, make sure there is
   a proper entry in <tt>/etc/services</tt> (or the YP services database,
   if you use that) on *all* machines, and that the entry is the same on
   *all* machines.  The default entry is:

     gs64ldi         50377/tcp        # GemStone netldi

   but you can name your netldi something else, e.g.,

     mynetldi        10000/tcp        # My MagLev netldi

   The important thing is that whichever netldi you name and ports you
   choose, that entry is the same on all machines, and should be available
   via the services database on all machines that will participate in the
   cluster.

2. Start <tt>netldi</tt> on stone machine

   Start the netldi daemon on the stone machine, to allow MagLev VMs on
   remote machines to connect to this Repository.  The easiest way to start
   a <tt>netldi</tt> with the proper parameters and environment for MagLev
   is to use the <tt>rake</tt> script:

     $ rake netldi:start

   See the detailed discussion near the end for details if this doesn't
   work for you.

3. Start the stone

   The stone must be started with the <tt>gs64ldi</tt> environment variable
   set correctly.  If you chose the default netldi name, you can simply
   start the stone in the normal manner:

     $ cd $MAGLEV_HOME
     $ rake maglev:start

   If you chose a different netldi name, you must pass that name to the
   <tt>maglev:start</tt> rake script:

     $ cd $MAGLEV_HOME
     $ rake maglev:start[mynetldi]

=== Setup remote MagLev VM machine and start MagLev VM

1. Setup environment on remote VM machine

   Ensure that <tt>MAGLEV_HOME</tt> is set and correct and that the netldi
   entry in <tt>/etc/services</tt> is the same as it is on the Repository
   machine. If you are using a non-standard netldi name, then:

     $ export MAGLEV_HOME=/where/ever/maglev/home/is
     $ export gs64ldi=mynetldi                # same name as on stone machine

   Make sure maglev-ruby is on your path:

     $ PATH=$PATH:$MAGLEV_HOME/bin

2. Setup login credentials

   Make sure there is a ~/.netrc entry for the user / machine / password of
   the stone machine.  E.g., if the stone will be running on
   <tt>maglev.foo.com</tt>, and the user is "fred"  with password "derf",
   the following <tt>~fred/.netrc</tt> file should work:

     machine maglev.foo.com fred derf

   Make sure <tt>~fred/.netrc</tt> has correct permissions (only the user
   can read it):

     $ chmod 0400 ~/.netrc

3. Start netldi on the remote VM machine:

   If you use standard settings, then simply start netldi as on the stone
   machine:

     $ rake netldi:start

4. Run MagLev with proper parameters:

   You do NOT need to start a stone on the remote machine.  To run a ruby
   script with MagLev connecting to a remote machine, you can do:

     $ maglev-ruby --stonehost maglev.foo.com hello.rb

   The <tt>--stonehost</tt> tells MagLev to connect to the stone running on
   <tt>maglev.foo.com</tt>.

== Issues / Problems


=== Quick checklist

If you run into problems getting a remote MagLev to run, ensure the
following items:

1. All machines have the same port specified for netldi in the services
   database.
2. netldi processes are running on all machines involved.

=== <tt>netldi</tt> issues

Getting the two netldi processes talking and configured correctly is the
most sensitive part of this process. Several things all need
coordination.

==== Ensure <tt>GEMSTONE_GLOBAL_DIR</tt> is set

The GemStone/S system relies on a directory, <tt>$GEMSTONE_GLOBAL_DIR</tt>,
to coordinate multiple processes.  Normally, the <tt>maglev-ruby</tt> and
Rake scripts handle this for you.  But if you are having trouble
connecting, you might want to start netldi processes on both machines with
the proper configuration as described below.

Assuming your <tt>$MAGLEV_HOME</tt> environment variable is correct:

  $ unset GEMSTONE_NRS_ALL                  # precautionary
  $ export GEMSTONE=$MAGLEV_HOME/gemstone
  $ export GEMSTONE_GLOBAL_DIR=$MAGLEV_HOME

If you are using a non-standard netldi name/port, then:

  $ export gs64ldi=mynetldi

After setting the environment as above, you can run the
<tt>startnetldi</tt> command (on both stone and remote nodes):

  $ $GEMSTONE/bin/startnetldi -g -a$USER -d ${gs64ldi:-gs64ldi}

$USER is the login name of the user running maglev.  There needs to be a
proper <tt>~$USER/.netrc</tt> file.  The netldi on this machine will then
start any processes as <tt>$USER</tt>.  This allows different users to run
the stone on the server and a VM on the client.

The meaning of the options is:
  -g        Guest mode: Allow clients of any user to login to GemStone (may
            not be necessary in all cases)
  -a $USER  Run netldi as user $USER
  -d        Print debug info
  ${gs64ldi:-gs64ldi}  The name of the netldi (must match entry in /etc/services)

For further details on connecting remote machines, consult the GS64 System
Administration Guide, especially the section "How to Set Up a Remote
Session".


=== Issues with Shared Page Cache Size

The size of the remote shared page cache (the one that runs on the node you
issued the "maglev-ruby" command from), may have to be changed.  By
default, it will start off with the size of page cache configured for the
stone machine, but that may be too big for the remote machine.

You can set a <tt>gem.conf</tt> file in the directory you run maglev-ruby
from to configure the parameter

  # Sample gem.conf file.  This sets page cache very small
  SHR_PAGE_CACHE_SIZE_KB = 20000;

Then try running the maglev script:

  $ maglev-ruby --stonehost maglev.foo.com hello.rb

NOTE: The stone caches the connection to the remote shared page cache for
some period of time (up to a minute in many cases).  So, if you are (a)
having problems getting a good remote page cache, and (b) it looks like one
is running on the remote machine, then kill it. To see if you have a remote
page cache running, you can use rake from <tt>$MAGLEV_HOME</tt>:

  $ cd $MAGLEV_HOME
  $ rake
  Status   Version    Owner    Pid   Port   Started     Type       Name
  ------- --------- --------- ----- ----- ------------ ------      ----
    OK    3.1.0.1   pbm       17461 50377 Oct 29 15:12 Netldi      gs64ldi
    OK    3.1.0.1   pbm       17679 49215 Oct 29 15:46 cache       maglev~ce60a142787a48e6

The second line in the output is the cache (notice there is no maglev stone
running, since this is the *remote* machine!).  To kill it:

  $ kill 17679

And then confirm it is gone:

  $ rake
  Status   Version    Owner    Pid   Port   Started     Type       Name
  ------- --------- --------- ----- ----- ------------ ------      ----
    OK    3.1.0.1   pbm       17461 50377 Oct 29 15:12 Netldi      gs64ldi

Now you can re-configure and try again.  In normal mode, it is a *good*
thing the shared page cache sticks around.  It avoids the cost of setting
it up on subsequent runs of a MagLev VM.  So in the normal case, you want
to have it running for a while.

=== Issues with <tt>$GEMSTONE_NRS_ALL</tt>

If you are running on a heterogeneous setup (e.g., Linux stone machine and
OSX VM machine), you may run into problems with some settings for
$GEMSTONE_NRS_ALL.  E.g., if you have:

  export GEMSTONE_NRS_ALL=#dir:/Users/pmclain/GemStone/logs

you may run into problems, since <tt>/Users</tt> is correct for OSX, but on
Linux, your home directory may be <tt>/home/pmcalin</tt>.  If the setting
for GEMSTONE_NRS_ALL is different, MagLev may complain and refuse to
connect.

* Need a nicer way than ~/.netrc to login
* Can we synchronize the netldi ports by explicit parameters on each side?
  Or is the only way to rely on /etc/services entries to be synchronized?
