= Sample Topaz Scripts

WARNING: These scripts are not fully tested and may not function as expected.
Seaside is loaded using Metacello Configurations on the web. There is no guarantee
that others will test their Metacello project updates on MagLev.

== Overview

This directory contains topaz scripts that do useful stuff. They can be 
invoked using rake -- i.e.
  rake maglev:input_file[src/topaz/filename]

You can trace the execution of the script and watch for errors using
  tail -f $MAGLEV_HOME/log/maglev/topaz.log

For example, this will load a boatload of Seaside goodness into a
running MagLev image.
  rake maglev:input_file[src/topaz/loadSeaside.topaz]

== Prerequisites

Some Rake scripts modify the $GEMSTONE environment variable. You
aren't allowed to do that if Rake is running in MagLev. To work
around this limitation, disable the pre-installed Rake Gem
  mv $MAGLEV_HOME/bin/rake $MAGLEV_HOME/bin/maglev-rake

Some scripts start processes that require /opt/gemstone/locks, 
which may not exist on your system. Here's one way to create it
    if [ ! -e /opt/gemstone ]
        then
        sudo mkdir -p /opt/gemstone /opt/gemstone/log /opt/gemstone/locks
        sudo chown $USER:${GROUPS[0]} /opt/gemstone /opt/gemstone/log /opt/gemstone/locks
        sudo chmod 770 /opt/gemstone /opt/gemstone/log /opt/gemstone/locks
    else
        echo "[Warning] /opt/gemstone directory already exists"
        echo "to replace it, remove or rename it and rerun this script"
    fi

== Additional information on GLASS, Seaside, MetaCello, etc.

* {Dale's Blog -- (gem)Stone Soup}[http://gemstonesoup.wordpress.com/]
* {James' Blog -- Programming Gems (on GemStone)}[http://programminggems.wordpress.com/]
* {GLASS Project on Google Code}[http://code.google.com/p/glassdb/wiki/TableOfContents]
* {Metacello Project on Google Code}[http://code.google.com/p/metacello/]
* {Metacello 1.0-beta.28 unearthed}[http://gemstonesoup.wordpress.com/2011/01/17/metacello-1-0-beta-28-unearthed/]
* {GLASS Mailing List}[http://seaside.gemstone.com/mailman/listinfo/beta]
* {GLASS Mailing List Archive}[http://forum.world.st/GLASS-f1460844.html]
* {Seaside Project}[http://seaside.st/]
* {Seaside Book}[http://book.seaside.st/book]

== Playing with Seaside in MagLev

To use the GemTools One-Click Pharo image at
http://seaside.gemstone.com/squeak/GemTools-MagLev-Pharo-1.0.zip instead
of running these snippets in Topaz, you'll need to start both MagLev
and a NetLDI
    maglev start
    maglev startnetldi
    
TODO: Turn some of these Seaside snippets into Topaz scripts in
this directory. Your suggestions and contributions are welcome.

The following is copied from the GemTools workspace you get when
logged in to MagLev from the Pharo image mentioned above.

The default username/password for Seaside is admin/seaside.

"start FastCGI adaptor ... does not return. 
Use #startGemServerOn: in standalone server gem"
    WAFastCGIAdaptor startOn: 9001.
    WAFastCGIAdaptor stop.

"start Swazoo adaptor ... does not return. 
Use #startGemServerOn: in standalone server gem"
    WAGsSwazooAdaptor startOn: 8383.
    WAGsSwazooAdaptor stop.
    SwazooServer initSingleton.

"Object log"
    WAAdmin 
        register: WAObjectLog 
        asApplicationAt: WAObjectLog entryPointName
        user: 'admin' password: 'tool'.
    ObjectLogEntry objectLog.
    ObjectLogEntry emptyLog.

"Set/clear breakpoints at usual suspects for errors"
    WABasicDevelopment setBreakPoints.
    WABasicDevelopment clearBreakPoints.

"Shortcuts"
    WAEnvironment reloadApplications.           "reload Seaside applications"
    WAAdmin defaultServerManager initialize.    "reset list of server adaptors"
    WABasicDevelopment reapSeasideCache.        "reap expired sessions"
    WADispatcher default.                       "access root dispatcher"
                        
"Specify FastCGI for runSeasideGems30"
    WAGemStoneRunSeasideGems default
        name: 'FastCGI';
        adaptorClass: WAFastCGIAdaptor;
        ports: #(9001 9002 9003).
    WAGemStoneRunSeasideGems restartGems.       "execute runSeasideGems30 script"

"Specify Swazoo for runSeasideGems30"
    WAGemStoneRunSeasideGems default
        name: 'Swazoo';
        adaptorClass: WAGsSwazooAdaptor;
        ports: #(8383).
    WAGemStoneRunSeasideGems restartGems.       "execute runSeasideGems30 script"

"Use this handler when running production Seaside servers out of topaz vms (default)"
    WAAdmin applicationExceptionHandlingDefaults 
        at: #exceptionHandler 
        put: WAGemStoneProductionErrorHandler.
  
"Use this handler when running Seaside server out of a GemTools vm"
    WAAdmin applicationExceptionHandlingDefaults 
        at: #exceptionHandler 
        put: WAGemStoneWalkbackErrorHandler.

"Use this handler when running development Seaside servers out of topaz vms"
    WAAdmin applicationExceptionHandlingDefaults 
        at: #exceptionHandler 
        put: WARemoteDebuggingWalkbackErrorHandler.

